---
layout: post
title: "Shitty Sales Have Made Product Development Harder"
summary: "Shitty, one-sided sales processes have made product development much
more difficult for early stage startups."
comment: true
---

In an ideal world, sales is really about matchmaking. When you sell the ideal
product to the ideal customer, it's really just about finding the intersection
of a burning need they have, and the thing you've built. Easy transaction.

In the actual world, this is far from how it happens. Historically, sales has
taken more of a technique-driven approach, leaning the right kind of closes,
dealing with objections, and finding any way possible to get your product in the
prospect's hands. 

And because of that, people hate salespeople (generally speaking).

And, that's made it much more difficult to have the kind of genuine
conversations needed to drive early-stage product development, the kind of
conversations that are required in order to achieve product-market fit. 

Getting to product-market fit with a product is something that all early-stage
startups have to go through. The first thing you build is a guess. Hopefully an
educated one, but a guess nonetheless. Only through talking to customers and
iterating on what you have, do you get to something that's a better fit, and
increase your chances of success.

Most companies die in this stage, and shitty sales techniques aren't helping.

Because of the pushy, traditional sales that we all know and hate, we're _all_
resistant to talking to anyone about their product. Over the years, we've been
trained to avoid these conversations, because we know it'll likely devolve into
a litany of techniques designed to coerce us into purchasing. 

But, without having conversations with potential customers, how does an
early-stage startup get any feedback on where they've missed the product-market
fit mark?

I've seen this first-hand so many times, I've long lost track. Calling a
potential customer, and pleading that you _only want to get feedback or
thoughts_ is, almost always, a failed approach. They sniff a backdoor sales
technique, and will flat out ignore the plea. No matter how genuine your intent
about simply gathering information, it's very likely you're getting shut down.

And so, the startup continues on, blinded by their own lack of feedback,
continuing to develop in a vacuum. And, they eventually die from this lack of
air.

One solution to this, of course, is to engage in formal research (as a user
researcher myself, this is something that comes much more naturally to me than other
approaches). With that said, many early startups lack the internal skill, or the
budgets, to engage in this kind of research (we can discuss the ROI of said
research, and I'd agree, but there are also some real cash constraints).

Ultimately, startups need to find a way around the horrible culture that shitty
sales have created, and get into a conversation with their customers and what
their problems are, what the product is, and the size of the mismatch. And, if
you're an early-stage startup, and you aggressively push your product into
someone where you know damn well there's not a great fit, you're just
perpetuating the problem. 

Finally, if someone reaches out to you, especially in the early stage, and says
they want to learn, _take the call_. Make them promise not to sell you, whatever
you have to do, but we can all help change the culture that's been created, and
collaborate together to bring better products into the world that we all want to
buy.


