---
layout: post
title: "How I Found Your Email"
summary: "I've been cold emailing a lot of people, and many folks are surprised
that I found their email. Here's where I dug it up."
comment: true
---

Over the past few weeks, we've been [cold emailing people][coldpost] about
[CrowdSync][cs], in hopes that we can get in front of people who have a problem
that we can help them solve. We look for people on sites like LinkedIn, and try
to establish whether we think they're a good fit, based on the words and phrases
they use, then we email them.

I get a lot of mixed responses - most of them polite, a few quite profane, and
others simple asking this:

> "How did you find my email?"

The short answer? Really, really easily. Here's one of the places we probably
found it:

## On Your Website

This blows my mind, but it is what it is. Many people put their email address
right on their website, in plain text, then email me wondering how we found it.
Chances are, they forgot it was there.

(So you know, we do much of our sourcing of people via LinkedIn, and finding
your website address is as simple as checking your profile, or just googling
your name a couple keywords.)

## On Your LinkedIn Profile

Speaking of LinkedIn, many people drop their email address right on their
LinkedIn profile. Again, in plain text. Piece of cake.

## In Your Resume

This is the gold mine that no one thinks about. An amazing amount of people have
their resume on their website (and for good reason). That resume, because it
tends to be printed and handed out or mailed, tends to have an email address on
it. 99% of the time we find a resume on your site, it has an email address in
it.

(BTW, we look for a resume almost immediately when we hit your site, because of
this)

## In Your Source Code

This one is a bit trickier, but often, people will have their email address
somewhere in the source code of their site, usually linked from a crappy contact form that exposes the link,
sometimes from another random link on the site.

We've even found these commented out in the code.

Finding these is a piece of cake. We view the source of your site (which can be
done in any browser), and we search for "@". 

## In Presentations

When people give talks, and share the slide deck on sites like
[Slideshare][slideshare], there's a better than average chance that the first or
last slide in the deck will have an email on it. Like resumes, this is something
we look for soon after we hit a site.

## On Social Profiles

On your [Twitter][twitter], [Behance][behance], [Dribbble][dribbble] or other
social profiles. Often just jammed right there in the bio.

## In Papers

Like presentations, if people publish papers in journals, the email address is
often right there on page 1, or somewhere in the citations or author bios on the
paper. Since many papers are freely available online, this is a pretty easy
place to snag contact information.

## How to Not Get Found

If you don't want to get cold emails from startups like us, I'd recommend
thinking of this as a checklist. Go through each of these places, and scrub up
where you have your contact information littered out there. It'll make our job
harder, and keep your privacy intact.

